welcome back the race for a corona virus
vaccine is on and nowhere is there more
optimism or perhaps progress than at
Oxford University they're testing a
vaccine that has shown success in rhesus
monkeys what's more they're ahead of
competitors because earlier testing of
the vaccine for other viruses has shown
it to be safe in people so human testing
can begin much sooner and joining me now
is Sir John Bell he's the Regius
professor of medicine at Oxford
University and he's gonna tell us more
about this welcome to Meet the Press sir
Bell let me just start with this
question one of your colleagues use the
percentage of 80% chance that this
vaccine is at least somewhat successful
in in the next year are you that
optimistic and are you at all concerned
our optimism around the world for what
you guys are doing has gotten a bit over
exuberant yeah so I obviously people who
have dedicated their careers to this
kind of a problem have a tendency to get
excited about the prospects because the
prospects are pretty good I I certainly
wouldn't put the possibility at 80%
that's a pretty big number but we're
gradually reeling it in bit by bit and
as every day goes by the likelihood of
success goes up you're in the midst of
you want to start some human trials
one of your potential hurdles is the
lack of outbreaks right in order to do
this you need to try your next stead of
trials where do you have you do you know
when you're going to be able to do this
and and where are you looking are you
looking at places like India where are
you looking to do these trials so so
we've still got lots of disease in the
UK we we probably have something in the
order of 15 or 20,000 transmissions a
day in the UK so there's no shortage of
disease here and we'll push we've
already started clinical trials so we've
already in
given the vaccine to about a thousand
people and we're gonna grow that pretty
rapidly we've consolidated the phase one
and two programs because we are pretty
confident that the vector itself is safe
because it's been used in about 5000
people already up to now
so that's allowed us to really
accelerate the Phase one program and we
hope that there would be enough disease
that we would get evidence that the
vaccine has efficacy by the beginning of
June what's the likelihood that if this
fails as a vaccine there will be
something that is usable as a
therapeutic and I'm just wondering and
then in the reverse as you we hear good
news about for instance REM dis aveer on
its ability as a therapeutic how helpful
is that in the development of the
vaccine so probably it's helpful for
sure it's probably not helpful in the
development of the vaccine I don't think
it really it works by a completely
different mechanism it works on the
gotcha
the RNA dependent RNA polymerase which
is a completely different replication
mechanism in the virus so we're we're
stimulating the immune response to the
virus which is at the other end of the
therapeutic options that we've got so
the two are probably not connected but
both could be helpful steps to trying to
get the virus under control there's been
some concern that you guys are going too
fast that and it's not just you it's all
of the all of the the labs that are
attempting to get a vaccine that there's
such pressure coming from national
governments that some safety protocols
will be overlooked I'm sure your you
like others are claiming you're meeting
all those protocols but there has to be
some concern that the pressure is going
to create gaps on this what are you
doing to try to prevent that yeah so so
you're absolutely right it's a big issue
for us is trying to be sure that we do
this quick
but we don't miss out any of the key
safety steps I think we've got reason to
believe that the efficacy the efficacy
of the vaccine in terms of generating
strong antibody responses is probably
going to be okay the real question is
whether the safety profile is going to
be fine so that's actually the main
focus of the clinical studies we did all
the preclinical work you would expect
anybody to do and in fact although some
companies have left out for example
primate studies they haven't done as
many preclinical study says we have we
did all of them we did Mouse ferret
primate we wanted to get a good read on
what's going on
and now we're being very careful in the
clinic to try and monitor exactly what's
happening but you know that doesn't mean
there won't be safety signals because
there may well be and will be on the
other hands to see if we can see them
when is the next time you will find out
if if this is not going to work you know
there's these different moments well
you'll find out up we can go to a next
step when will you know
if this isn't going to be a successful
vaccine effort yeah so I think there'll
be primary data released this week
that'll be an important milestone and
then we'll have to wait until there's
enough incident disease in the Phase two
cohort which has been vaccinated now to
see whether we have largely eliminated
the disease in those vaccinated with
this vaccine as opposed to the placebo
and that's really the test and that's
what we'll probably get a signal based
on current levels of the disease we'll
probably get a signal in early June
we're ready to move trials overseas if
the disease Peters out in the UK so
we've got sites already in play in other
bits of the world where it's active so
we're pretty sure we'll get a signal by
June about whether this works or not and
finally do you have a sense of this will
be a one-time vaccine or something
closer to the flu where perhaps we have
to have a different vaccine due to a
mutation every year
yeah so so coronavirus doesn't mutate at
the pace of flu as far as we can see but
it it's also quite a tricky virus in
terms of generating long-standing immune
responses to it and I as a result I
suspect we may need to have relatively
regular vaccinations against corona
viruses going into the future that that
of course remains to be seen but that's
my bed at the moment is that this is
likely to be a seasonal coronavirus
vaccine
Sir John Bell at Oxford the whole
world's written for you thanks for
coming to the mind your views with us
thank you very much thank you hello from
Washington I'm Chuck Todd and thanks for
checking out the Meet the Press channel
on YouTube click on the button down here
to subscribe and click over here to
watch the latest interviews highlights
and other digital exclusives